docs: extend state documentation (#3731)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: yellow-paper/docs/state/index.md

---

# State

> The global state is the set of data that makes up Aztec - it is persisted and only updates when new blocks are added to the chain. The state consists of multiple different categories of data with varying requirements. Common for all of the categories is that they need strong integrity guarantees and efficient membership proofs. Like for most other blockchains, this can be enforced by structuring the data as leafs in Merkle trees. However, unlike most other blockchains, our contract state cannot use a Merkle tree as a key-value store for each contracts data. The reason being that we have both private and public state. While public state could be stored in a key-value tree, private state cannot - as doing so would leak information whenever the private state is updated, even if encrypted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The global state is the set of data that makes up Aztec - it is persistent and only updates when new blocks are added to the chain. 

The state consists of multiple different categories of data with varying requirements. What all of the categories have in common is that they need strong integrity guarantees and efficient membership proofs. Like most other blockchains, this can be enforced by structuring the data as leafs in Merkle trees. 

However, unlike most other blockchains, our contract state cannot use a Merkle tree as a key-value store for each contracts data. The reason for this is that we have both private and public state; while public state could be stored in a key-value tree, private state cannot, as doing so would leak information whenever the private state is updated, even if encrypted.

```

When dealing with private data, only the hash of the data is stored in the leaf in our data tree and we must setup a derivation mechanism that ensures nullifiers can be computed deterministically from the pre-image (the data that was hashed). This way, no-one can tell what data is stored in the leaf (unless they already know it), and therefore won't be able to derive the nullifier and tell if the leaf is active or deleted. 

Convincing someone that a piece of data is active can then be done by proving its membership in the data tree, and that it is not deleted by proving its non-membership in the nullifier tree. This ability to efficiently prove non-membership is one of the extra requirements we have for some parts of our state. To support the requirements most efficiently, we use two families of Merkle trees:
- The [Append-only Merkle tree](./tree_impls.md#append-only-merkle-trees), which supports efficient membership proofs,
- The [Indexed Merkle tree](./tree_impls.md#indexed-merkle-trees), which supports efficient membership and non-membership proofs but increase cost of adding leafs.

### Private State Access

> Whenever a user is to read of use data, they must then convince the "rollup" that the their data is active. As mentioned above, they must prove that the data is in the data tree (membership proof) and that it is still active (non-membership proof). However, there are nuances to this approach! 

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand what the first phrase here is trying to say. "Whenever a user is to read of use data" ? I think its a typo

> One important aspect is *when* state can be accessed. In most blockchains, state is always accessed at the head of the chain and changes are only made by the sequencer as new blocks are added. However, since private execution relies on proofs generated by the user this would be very impractical - one users transaction would invalidate everyone elses. 

Reviewer: ``` suggestion
One important aspect to consider is *when* state can be accessed. In most blockchains, state is always accessed at the head of the chain and changes are only made by the sequencer as new blocks are added. 

However, since private execution relies on proofs generated by the user, this would be very impractical - one users transaction could invalidate everyone elses. 
```

> While proving inclusion in the data tree can be done using historical state, the non-membership in the nullifier tree cannot. Membership can be proven since we are using a append-only tree, so anything that was there in the past, must still be in the tree now. However, this don't work for the non-membership proof as it would only prove that the data was active at the time the proof was generated, not that it is still active! Which would allow a user to create multiple transactions spending the same data and then send them all at once - double-spending!

Reviewer: ``` suggestion

While proving inclusion in the data tree can be done using historical state, the non-membership proof in the nullifier tree cannot. 

Membership can be proven using historical state because we are using an append-only tree, so anything that was there in the past must still be in the append-only tree now. 

However, this doesn't work for the non-membership proof, as it can only prove that the data was active at the time the proof was generated, not that it is still active today! This would allow a user to create multiple transactions spending the same data and then send those transactions all at once, creating a double spend. 

```

> To solve this, we need to perform the non-membership proofs at the head of the state - which only the sequencer knows! Meaning that instead of the user proving that the data is not in the nullifier tree, they provide the nullifiers as part of their transaction, and the sequencer is then to prove non-membership **AND** insert them into the nullifier tree. This way, if multiple transactions are sent with the same nullifier, only one of them will be included in the block as the others will fail the non-membership proof.

Reviewer: ``` suggestion
To solve this, we need to perform the non-membership proofs at the head of the chain, which only the sequencer knows! This means that instead of the user proving that the data is not in the nullifier tree, they provide the nullifiers as part of their transaction, and the sequencer then proves non-membership **AND** inserts them into the nullifier tree. This way, if multiple transactions are sent with the same nullifier, only one of them will be included in the block as the others will fail the non-membership proof.
```

import DocCardList from '@theme/DocCardList';

<DocCardList />

---

:::warning **Discussion Point**: 

> "Indexed merkle tree" is not a very telling name, as our normal merkle trees are indexed too. I propose we call them "successor merkle trees" instead since each leaf refers to its successor. The low-nullifiers are also the predecessor of the nullifier you are inserting, so it seems nice that you prove that the nullifier you are inserting has a predecessor and that the predecessors successor would also be the successor of the nullifier you are inserting.

Reviewer: 'successor merkle tree' sounds like the successor of whatever merkle tree came before it 🤷

Reviewer 2: "Sorted linked merkle tree"
